<html>
 <head> 
 </head> 
 <body bgcolor="#ffffcc"> 
  <text encoding="unset" id="http://www.helmets.org/astmdocs/min0211.htm" title="ASTM F-8.53 Helmet Subcommittee Minutes - Miami, November 2002"> 
   <title>    &lt;span __num="0"&gt;     ASTM F-8.53 Helmet Subcommittee Minutes - Miami, November 2002    &lt;/span&gt;   </title> 
   <meta content="text/html" http-equiv="Content-Type"> 
   <meta content="ASTM,headgear,subcommittee, Minutes, Miami, November, 2002" name="KEYWORDS"> 
   <meta content=" ASTM F8.53 Subcommittee Minutes - Miami, November 2002" name="DESCRIPTION"> 
   <img align="LEFT" height="78" hspace="20" src="../images/bhsi89an.gif" width="239"> 
   <center> 
    <br> 
    <h4> <span __num="1" __label="true"> Bicycle Helmet Safety Institute </span> </h4> 
    <hr color="#800000" size="5"> 
    <h4> <span __num="2" __label="true"> ASTM F8.53 Helmet SubCommittee </span> <p> <span __num="3" __label="true"> Unofficial and for members' convenience only </span> </p> </h4> 
    <hr color="#800000" size="5"> 
    <hr color="#800000" size="5"> 
    <br> 
    <br> 
    <br> 
    <br> 
    <h2> <span __num="4" __label="true"> Minutes from ASTM F8.53 meeting: Miami, November, 2002. </span> </h2> 
   </center> 
   <br> 
   <br> 
   <h4> <span __num="5" __label="true"> ASTM Sub-Committee F-08.53 Headgear &amp; Helmets </span> <br> <span __num="6" __label="true"> DRAFT MINUTES OF MEETING </span> <br> <span __num="7" __label="true"> November 8, 2002 - Miami, FL </span> </h4> 
   <span __num="8" __label="true"> The subcommittee meeting was called to order by Randy Swart at 8:42 AM. Dave Halstead (Chairman) was called away early and could not preside over this meeting. There were 22 members and 7 visitors in attendance. Attendance list was passed around. </span> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="9" __label="true"> Officers </span> </b> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="10" __label="true"> Chairman: Dave Halstead </span> <br> <span __num="11" __label="true"> 1st Vice Chairman: Randy Swart </span> <br> <span __num="12" __label="true"> 2nd Vice Chairman: Dennis Piper </span> <br> <span __num="13" __label="true"> Secretary: Isabel Wright </span> </p> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="14" __label="true"> Members </span> </b> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="15" __label="true"> Jason Brand </span> <br> <span __num="16" __label="true"> Nelson Kraemer </span> <br> <span __num="17" __label="true"> George Nagobads </span> <br> <span __num="18" __label="true"> Fred Sulzbach </span> <br> <span __num="19" __label="true"> Roy Burek </span> <br> <span __num="20" __label="true"> Dean Fisher </span> <br> <span __num="21" __label="true"> Thom Parks </span> <br> <span __num="22" __label="true"> David Thom </span> <br> <span __num="23" __label="true"> Len Clement </span> <br> <span __num="24" __label="true"> Mark Granger </span> <br> <span __num="25" __label="true"> David Rudd </span> <br> <span __num="26" __label="true"> Chris Withnall </span> <br> <span __num="27" __label="true"> Eric Darnell </span> <br> <span __num="28" __label="true"> Joseph Lunny </span> <br> <span __num="29" __label="true"> John Sabelli </span> <br> <span __num="30" __label="true"> Steven Keller </span> <br> <span __num="31" __label="true"> Peter McGinnis </span> <br> <span __num="32" __label="true"> David Spenciner </span> </p> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="33" __label="true"> Visitors </span> </b> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="34" __label="true"> Jean Francois Laperriere </span> <br> <span __num="35" __label="true"> Dennis Lieu </span> <br> <span __num="36" __label="true"> Michael Swain </span> <br> <span __num="37" __label="true"> Matthew Pfeffer </span> <br> <span __num="38" __label="true"> Trish Bare-Grounds </span> <br> <span __num="39" __label="true"> Heiko Schlarb </span> <br> <span __num="40" __label="true"> Vijaya Kuruganti </span> <br> </p> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="41" __label="true"> ASTM Staff: </span> </b> <span __num="42" __label="true"> Jim Olshefsky </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="43" __label="true"> Note: Minutes to committee/subcommittee meetings will no longer be mailed out. They will be available at the ASTM Website and the BHSI Website. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="44" __label="true"> Announcements: ASTM is making virtual meeting technology available to members. An Internet connection is required. A sub group of the subcommittees could meet via Internet to make presentations or make progress on task group work in between regular meetings. Call Jim Olshefsky (Staff Manager) to get more info on how to set up a virtual meeting. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="45" __label="true"> 1) Introductions were made of those in attendance. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="46" __label="true"> 2) Changes in agenda - Pole Vaulting &amp; Martial Arts were moved up in the agenda. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="47" __label="true"> 3) F-1446-00 Base Standard - </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="48" __label="true"> a) Headform specification: - David Spenciner - We currently reference a draft international standard (ISO 6220) that has been discontinued in our helmet tests. Intention is to take the information from this document and put it in ASTM format than we would have our own headform standard. The document was balloted and there were 3 comments and 1 negative. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="49" __label="true"> Negative: Dave Thom - Frankfort plane vs. Basic plane. No evidence that the Basic plane corresponds to Frankfort plane. EN960 is referenced in this document but Frankfort plane is not mentioned in EN960. If there is a reference that ties these two planes together, then it should be listed in the headform draft. If not, then the term "Frankfort plane" should be taken out. It was determined that this wording can be removed as an editorial change. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="50" __label="true"> Motion: Made by Dean Fisher: Term was found to be editorial and the term Frankfort plane will be removed. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="51" __label="true"> Vote: </span> <br> <span __num="52" __label="true"> Yes --- Passed unanimously </span> <br> <span __num="53" __label="true"> No --- </span> <br> <span __num="54" __label="true"> Abstain --- </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="55" __label="true"> Additional comments: </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="56" __label="true"> 1) Comment from Dave Thom - Product marking discussion - Product marking vs. just "marking" </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="57" __label="true"> 2) Comment from Jason Brand &amp; Dave Thom - 4 typos in document. 2 pages of text and 5 pages of tables. The numbers (typos) in the tables will be changed to reflect what is currently in the ISO draft standard. Dave Spenciner commented that in moving forward, there should be some review of these numbers at a later date. These would not be editorial changes. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="58" __label="true"> 3) Comment from Jacques Tholin deals with the possibility of the headform rotating on impact. Energy used in rotation is not captured by linear accelerometer. This was discussed yesterday at shirtsleeves meeting. Will wait for Jacques Tholin to come to next meeting for further explanation and discussion. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="59" __label="true"> 4) Comment from Guillaume Bélanger - (Section 4) Suggests that all headform sizes should be included from A-Q as per EN960 instead of only the 5 sizes (A, E, J, M &amp; O). After extended discussion it was concluded that this topic along with the shape geometry will be discussed as part of the next revision, since this document has passed main committee. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="60" __label="true"> 5) Comment from Guillaume Bélanger - Delete the word "helmet" from the headform standard. (editorial change). </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="61" __label="true"> 6) Comment from Celia Peterson - Cross reference to ANSI headform C which is a part of ASTM F355 (playground equipment) (similar to DOT standard). - There is another reference that they can use, original ANSI standard or DOT standard. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="62" __label="true"> Congratulations were given to Dave Spenciner for completing this standard. Dave will get with ASTM editorial staff regarding small changes. The document then moves on to publication. Dave will then start work on possible revisions to the published document based on comments provided at this last ballot. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="63" __label="true"> b) Comprehensive Clean-up - Dan Pomerening - Dan was absent from this meeting due to family reasons - Dan continues to look at this subcommittee's various standards to make them more uniform in format. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="64" __label="true"> c) Labeling - Jason Brand - Jason had put together a spreadsheet of all labeling from each of the standards of this subcommittee plus two from Ice Hockey subcommittee. Some revisions were made after the Pittsburgh meeting and copies were sent to the labeling task group. More assistance is needed. The plan is to specifically look at F1446, revise, look for commonalties and then suggest labeling for " use only for ..." and multiple standards. After F1446, will go through remaining standards and revise as needed. Keep in mind label requirements for CPSC and CSA. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="65" __label="true"> Labeling Task Group </span> <br> <span __num="66" __label="true"> Task group: Jason Brand,John Sabelli,Guillaume Bélanger, Mark Granger, Thom Parks </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="67" __label="true"> Note: If anyone would like to be on the e-mail list of the labeling task group, please contact Jason Brand (jason@teamwendy.com) </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="68" __label="true"> d) Dynamic Strap Test (F1446) - Roy Burek - Ballot item - Purpose of suggested change dealt with instructing technicians on how to adjust the harness when testing to remove variability. 1 negative and 2 comments. Negative - Dave Spenciner - The proposed change was not clear. Needs clarification to add an extra step. Wording changes - should be appropriate "referenced" headform. An additional wording change regarding "impact headform". Will confirm with ASTM to make sure these changes are editorial. The changes will be made and the negative was withdrawn.Comments - Additional comments were discussed from Dennis Piper, Jason Brand and Jeff Skein. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="69" __label="true"> Additional activity (F1446) - Dave Spenciner has offered to help with the P&amp;B task force. We have some data from CPSC's round robin several years ago that may work without further testing for the Precision and Bias statement </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="70" __label="true"> 4) F697-00 Practice for care and use of Athletic Mouth Protectors </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="71" __label="true"> No activity. Dr. Hank Cross was not at the meeting. Nothing pending. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="72" __label="true"> 5) F910-86 Baseball / softball face protector - Larry Maddux not here - No activity </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="73" __label="true"> 6) Martial Arts Helmet - Dr. Dennis Lieu - The task group met yesterday with approx. 12 people at the meeting. The draft specification was covered in detail. Copies are available from Dr. Lieu. Progress has been good, and there has been good cooperation. The draft martial arts specification came from already existing ASTM test methods and some of the work from Dr. Lieu's laboratory. The draft currently calls for 2 types of tests. </span> </p> 
   <ul> 
    <p> <span __num="74" __label="true"> a) Falling test, standard ASTM test, low &amp; high energy levels </span> </p> 
    <p> <span __num="75" __label="true"> b) Impact test , swinging arm which simulates types of impact in martial arts. low &amp; high energy. </span> </p> 
    <p> </p> 
   </ul> 
   <span __num="76" __label="true"> This is not a one time use head gear. Needs to survive multiple impacts over an extended period of time. A Hybrid III head was proposed. The impact tester for the swing arm needs to be built. Low temperature test was eliminated. Test line - area of testing was expanded where impacts are expected. Eliminate max. mass specification. Headgear must protect the wearer and opponent (striker). Labeling will have to be reviewed. Discussed life span recommendation. It was noted that there is a European martial arts standard. </span> 
   <p> <span __num="77" __label="true"> 7) Pole Vaulting Helmets - Peter McGinnis - The task group met yesterday. Following are the minutes of the task group meeting. Note: Only an overview of these minutes was discussed at the full subcommittee meeting. </span> </p> 
   <p> </p> 
   <hr noshade size="6"> 
   <span __num="78" __label="true"> F08.53 TASK GROUP ON POLE VAULT HEADGEARMeeting Minutes </span> 
   <br> 
   <span __num="79" __label="true"> November 7, 2002 - 8-10 am </span> 
   <br> 
   <span __num="80" __label="true"> Fontainebleau Hilton - Miami Beach, FL </span> 
   <p> <span __num="81" __label="true"> Present: Spencer Chang, Tim Curley, Edward Dare, Eric Darnell, Cynthia Doyle, Bill Farrell, Dean Fisher (co-chair), Mark Granger, David Halstead, Jan Johnson, G. Peter Macon, Mark Massmann, Peter McGinnis (co-chair), Dennis Piper, Eddie Seese, Wilson Soohoo, Randy Swart, David Thom </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="82" __label="true"> 1. Discussion: Is a pole vault headgear standard needed? </span> </p> 
   <ul> 
    <li> <span __num="83" __label="true"> 4 state high school associations require helmet use by high school pole vaulters but do not specify type of helmet to use: Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="84" __label="true"> New York State legislature has proposed a law requiring all college and high school pole vaulters to wear helmets </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="85" __label="true"> implementation of rules requiring larger pole vault pits and padding of hard surfaces eliminates much of the head injury risks - but many head injuries in pole vaulting have occurred in non- compliant facilities (i.e., unpadded hard surfaces around the pit or unpadded standard bases) </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="86" __label="true"> expectations of helmet users will exceed capabilities of helmets - clear warning labels explaining the limitations of a helmet and the instructions for helmet use would need to be included as part of a standard </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="87" __label="true"> helmets should not be considered the only solution to the problem of reducing head injuries in pole vaulting, but one part of an overall plan to reduce injuries in pole vaulting </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="88" __label="true"> some concern about hyperflexion injuries to vaulter's neck when vaulter lands on pole vault pad while wearing headgear </span> </li> 
   </ul> 
   <p> <span __num="89" __label="true"> Motion by Halstead, second by Seese: </span> <br> <span __num="90" __label="true"> To create a pole vault headgear standard to be considered by governing bodies as part of an overall plan to reduce pole vault injuries. </span> <br> <span __num="91" __label="true"> Motion passed: 19 in favor, 0 opposed </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="92" __label="true"> 2. Discussion: elements of pole vault headgear standard </span> </p> 
   <ul> 
    <p> </p> 
    <li> <span __num="93" __label="true"> single or multiple impact? </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="94" __label="true"> which impact anvils will be included in testing - flat, cylindrical, curbstone, hazard? </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="95" __label="true"> extent of helmet coverage? </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="96" __label="true"> shape? </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="97" __label="true"> drop height? </span> <p> </p> </li> 
   </ul> 
   <span __num="98" __label="true"> Dean Fisher has begun developing a pole vault headgear standard which combines elements of F1446, F1447, and F1492. </span> 
   <p> <span __num="99" __label="true"> Motion by Halstead, second by Seese: </span> <br> <span __num="100" __label="true"> The task group recommends that the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets approves the following statement: While the committee is working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers, and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet one of the following standards: ASTM 1492, Snell N-94, or NOCSAE lacrosse helmet without face guard. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="101" __label="true"> Discussion: </span> </p> 
   <ul> 
    <p> </p> 
    <li> <span __num="102" __label="true"> availability of helmets meeting the Snell N-94 or ASTM 1492 standards? </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="103" __label="true"> why not include CPSC bicycle helmet standard? (inadequate coverage) </span> <p> </p> </li> 
    <li> <span __num="104" __label="true"> what are the performance characteristics of the NOCSAE approved lacrosse helmets? </span> </li> 
   </ul> 
   <p> <span __num="105" __label="true"> Motion amended to read as follows: </span> <br> <span __num="106" __label="true"> The task group recommends that the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets approves the following statement: While the committee is working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers, and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet one of the following standards: ASTM 1492 or NOCSAE lacrosse helmet without face guard. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="107" __label="true"> Motion passed: 12 in favor, 1 opposed, 5 abstentions (see note below for the final version of the statement as approved by F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets) </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="108" __label="true"> TASKS: Dean Fisher has begun and will continue development of a pole vault headgear standard which combines elements of F1446, F1447, and F1492. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="109" __label="true"> Meeting adjourned at 9:50 am. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="110" __label="true"> Respectfully submitted: Peter M. McGinnis, Ph.D. (Co-chair) </span> </p> 
   <p> </p> 
   <hr noshade size="6"> 
   <p> <span __num="111" __label="true"> On Friday, November 8, 2002, the F08.53 Subcommittee on Headgear and Helmets met and passed the following by a vote of 8 in favor and 0 opposed, with 8 abstentions:While the committee is working to establish an appropriate headgear standard for use in pole vaulting the committee recommends that governing bodies, consumers, and others desiring to use helmets immediately use helmets that meet one of the following standards: ASTM 1492 or NOCSAE lacrosse helmet without face guard or visor. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="112" __label="true"> Motion was made by Peter McGinnis and seconded by Dave Thom. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="113" __label="true"> Vote </span> <br> <span __num="114" __label="true"> Yes 8 </span> <br> <span __num="115" __label="true"> No 0 </span> <br> <span __num="116" __label="true"> Abstain 8 </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="117" __label="true"> 8) F2040 Recreational Snow Sports - Sid Roslund - Short discussion regarding editorial issues of plus/minus symbol on the ballot item. This document is ready to go to main committee ballot. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="118" __label="true"> 9) Roller hockey - Guillaume Bélanger - This is a new standard and was put out for ballot. 4 negatives were received along with a series of comments. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="119" __label="true"> a) John Sabelli - section 4.5 re: ear coverage. The drawing will be fixed to address this persuasive negative. Discussion on section 4.4 (1st sentence) </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="120" __label="true"> b) Randy Swart - Impact is currently on 4 specific points on or above test line in the document. Discussion on controlled and uncontrolled. There was a vote on the negative - should allow testing on any location on or above the test line and not restricting it to specific sites. Negative was found to be persuasive. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="121" __label="true"> Vote </span> <br> <span __num="122" __label="true"> Yes 11 </span> <br> <span __num="123" __label="true"> No 0 </span> <br> <span __num="124" __label="true"> Abstain 7 </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="125" __label="true"> c) David Spenciner - Discussion on rationale on UV testing and relevance of the test proposed. There was a consensus to remove artificial aging test from the draft. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="126" __label="true"> d) Labeling - Not intended for Ice Hockey - Leave labeling as is. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="127" __label="true"> e) Garnet Alexander - Section 4.5 and 5.1 temperature too high (50°C) for helmet conditioning. A task group was formed to look into this. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="128" __label="true"> Heat aging helmets Task Group </span> <br> <span __num="129" __label="true"> Task group Jason Brand Guillaume Bélanger </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="130" __label="true"> Guillaume will continue with the development of this standard and re-ballot. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="131" __label="true"> 10) Soccer Headgear - Dennis Piper - The letter from the US Soccer Federation (lead team physician) regarding the draft soccer helmet standard was read to the subcommittee. Dennis Piper chaired the task group meeting. About 25 people attended. The helmet would protect against incidental impacts in soccer, primarily from goalposts, the ground and other players, not specifically heading. The draft went out for ballot and received many negatives. These were discussed in the task group meeting. One negative was regarding the retention system in the draft required a hard shell. There was a vote that there should not be a hard shell-dependent retention system in the standard. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="132" __label="true"> Vote </span> <br> <span __num="133" __label="true"> Yes 14 </span> <br> <span __num="134" __label="true"> No 0 </span> <br> <span __num="135" __label="true"> Abstain 6 </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="136" __label="true"> 11) F1447-99a Bicycle - (now combined with F1751) - Les Earnest - There was 1 comment (affirmative w/ comment) from Jacques Tholin - Paragraph 13: label Interior / permanent label Labeling task group will discuss the word "permanent". </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="137" __label="true"> 12) F1751-00 - Recreational Roller Skating - Les Earnest - see above (F1447) </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="138" __label="true"> 13) F1898-01 Infant toddler Non-Motorized Wheeled Vehicle - No activity. Nothing pending </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="139" __label="true"> 14) F1952-00 Downhill Bicycle Racing - No activity. Nothing pending </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="140" __label="true"> 15) F2032-00 BMX Bicycle - No activity. Nothing pending </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="141" __label="true"> 16) F429-01 Football test methods - Republished last year. No report </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="142" __label="true"> 17) F 717-95 Football helmets - Thad Ide No report </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="143" __label="true"> 18) F1163-00 Equestrian- status - Roy Burek - This item went to ballot. There were 3 negatives. There was a problem with the format of the ballot and It was unclear from the ballot what exactly was being changed. After discussion and clarification, all 3 negatives were withdrawn. The balloted change goes on to main committee ballot. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="144" __label="true"> Task group Roy Burek, John Sabelli </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="145" __label="true"> Additional equestrian activity - Dave Halstead has sent a letter to Senator Dodd who is head of a committee that is looking at a bill in the US Senate that would require the CPSC to adopt an equestrian helmet standard. This is similar to the legislation that required the CPSC to adopt a bicycle helmet standard. The legislation would list the adoption of the ASTM standard, and not one from the CPSC. The issue of updating the standard is also included in the letter. There has been no response since the letter was sent 9/6/02. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="146" __label="true"> Branch task group - Roy is still looking for a letter that was in the equestrian press, regarding that ASTM had not considered branches &amp; equestrian helmets. There are concerns in the UK regarding penetration injuries. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="147" __label="true"> 19) Rodeo Helmets - New standard - Status: - Task group will continue activity. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="148" __label="true"> Task group Fred Sulzbach, Len Clement, Roy Burek </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="149" __label="true"> 20) F1492-00 Skateboarding - No report </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="150" __label="true"> Notes: No manufacturers are making helmets certified to F1492. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="151" __label="true"> 21) F-1849-00 Short Track speed ice skating - No report, nothing pending </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="152" __label="true"> 22) Whitewater sports helmet - Eric Darnell is the new task group chairman (point person) More data is needed regarding injuries. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="153" __label="true"> Task group: Eric Darnell, Gill Turner, Dave Halstead </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="154" __label="true"> 23) Mountaineering. - No active task group </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="155" __label="true"> 24) Jaw Joint Protectors - New (Z6103Z) - Chris Withnall reported that there is activity in this area with Biokinetics and Wayne State University working together. There is a target date of DEC 2005 for a completion date. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="156" __label="true"> Task group Chris Withnall </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="157" __label="true"> 25) Other business </span> </p> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="158" __label="true"> F-08 Administrative deadlines: </span> </b> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="159" __label="true"> 1st round subcommittee ballots Due 1DEC02 </span> <br> <span __num="160" __label="true"> Minutes and Main ballot items Due 23JAN03 </span> <br> <span __num="161" __label="true"> 2nd round subcommittee ballots Due 7MAR03 </span> <br> <span __num="162" __label="true"> Agendas (Kansas City) Due 4APR03 </span> </p> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="163" __label="true"> Review of subcommittee membership: </span> </b> <br> <span __num="164" __label="true"> The subcommittee is in balance as regards to producers vs. all other categories. </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="165" __label="true"> Producers: Voters 26 - Non-Voters 30 </span> <br> <span __num="166" __label="true"> Users: Voters 8 - NonVoters 1Consumer: Voters 0 - NonVoters 0General Interest: Voters 57 - Nonvoters 11Unclassified Voters 1 - Non Voters 4Totals: Voters 92 - Non-voters 46 </span> </p> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="167" __label="true"> Future F-08 meeting dates are as follows: </span> </b> <span __num="168" __label="true"> May 7-10 2003 Kansas City, MO Westin Crown Center, Kansas City, MO </span> <br> <span __num="169" __label="true"> Nov. 19-22 2003 Tampa, FL Tampa Marriott Waterside, Tampa, FL </span> <br> <span __num="170" __label="true"> May 18-21 2004 Salt Lake City, UT Little America Hotel &amp; Towers </span> <br> <span __num="171" __label="true"> Nov. 10-13 2004 Washington, D.C. Omni Shoreham, Washington D.C. </span> <br> <span __num="172" __label="true"> May 17-20 2005 Reno, NV Hilton Reno Resort, Reno, NV </span> <br> <span __num="173" __label="true"> Nov. 9-12 2005 Dallas, TX Hyatt Regency, Dallas, TX </span> <br> <span __num="174" __label="true"> May 16-19 2006 Toronto, Canada Sheraton Centre Toronto </span> <br> <span __num="175" __label="true"> Nov. 15-18 2006 Atlanta, GA Hyatt Regency, Atlanta </span> </p> 
   <p> <b> <span __num="176" __label="true"> Next Meeting </span> </b> <span __num="177" __label="true"> - May 7-10, 2003 - Kansas City, MO </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="178" __label="true"> The meeting was adjourned at 11:41 AM </span> </p> 
   <p> <span __num="179" __label="true"> Respectfully submitted,Isabel Wright (Secretary) </span> <br> <br> <br> </p> 
   <hr color="#800000" size="5"> 
   <br> 
   <i> <span __num="180" __label="true"> Last modified: July 21, 2002 </span> </i> 
   <p> <a href="../index.htm"> <img align="RIGHT" alt="Return to BHSI home page" border="0" src="../images/bhsibut.gif"> </a> <br> </p> 
   <p> </p> 
   <form> 
    <input onclick="history.back()" type="button" value="Back to previous page"> 
   </form> 
   <p> </p> 
  </text> 
 </body>
</html>